# jQuery Best Practices

As you start to write more and more jQuery code, it's a good idea to use some best practices to help your code be more efficient and organized. Developers <3 efficiency! Here are a few of our favourite techniques.

## Cache Your Selectors

Whenever we use jQuery's `$` selector, jQuery goes and searches through your page for all possible matches.  If you've got a large site, a simple selector like `$('.box')` might take a long time and slow down your site, especially if you do it more than once. If you need to work with DOM elements more than once, you can hold onto them the first time they're found by storing them in a variable. In jQuery lingo, we call this *caching your selectors*

**Inefficent (booo!)**

```
$('.box').addClass('square');
$('.box').css('color', 'green');
$('.box').html('<p>This is a box.</p>');
```

**Efficient (huzzah!)**

```
//find all elements with a class of box and cache them
var $boxes = $('.box');

$boxes.addClass('square');
$boxes.css('color', 'green');
$boxes.html('<p>This is a box.</p>');
```

Note that it's common practice to name your variables starting with a '$' if they are holding jQuery objects.  It serves as a helpful reminder that you can use all the amazing jQuery methods on this variable.

```
var $listItems = $('li');
var favouriteColour = "salmon";
```

## Chain your methods

A lot of jQuery methods will return the original object that you were working with. 

`$('#widget').addClass('active'); //returns $('#widget')`

Huh? Think of it this way. You hand off your widget div to jQuery, tell jQuery to add a class to it, and then jQuery says "here you go!" and gives it back to you with a newly added class. Since you have the widget again, you could potentially hand it back to jQuery and ask it to do something else, like change the text inside it. This can go on as many times as you like, as long as you're using methods that hand the original thing back to you.

When we keep asking jQuery to do more things in the same transaction, it's called *chaining*.

```
$(#widget).addClass('active').text('It was a dark and stormy night').css('background', 'grey');

//is shorthand for
$(#widget).addClass('active');
$(#widget).text('It was a dark and stormy night');
$(#widget).css('background', 'grey');
```

This can improve readability of your code and is also another technique to cache a selector.


# How to Organize Your JavaScript

## Problem 1: 'Spaghetti Code'

As you add more lines and functionality to your JS code, it can start to get a little unruly. You might have trouble tracking down which lines do what, or end up having a hard time changing or adding new features. If you ever find yourself in an unorganized tangle, you've probably stumbled upon (or written!) what we call spaghetti code. Don't panic! A little code organization can help you steer clear of these issues.

## Problem 2: Conflicting Code

Another reason to organize your code is to avoid conflicts with other plugins or libraries that you're running on your website. Say you create a variable to hold your twitter handle for your contact page, but you're also embedding a twitter widget on your website. You might end up with something like this:

```
var twitter = 'http://twitter.com'; //created by the widget
/* ... lots of other code ... */
var twitter = '@thisishackeryou'; //created by you
```

Since variables can be re-assigned in JavaScript, we've gone ahead on over-written the widget's variable and most likely broken it!  Again, we can fix this through better organization.


# Scope
In our sample conflict above, we're running into what's called a scope issue. 

Variables declared outside of a function are part of the **global** scope. This means they can be accessed (and over-written!) from *anywhere* in your code.

On the other hand, variables declared inside a function have **local** scope. This means they're only available to other code *inside the function*

### Examples

The global variable `planet` is accessible within the function.

```
var planet = "Earth";

function whereAmI(){
  console.log(planet);
}

whereAmI(); //logs "Earth"
```

The locally scoped `planet` variable over-writes the global one.

```
var planet = "Earth";

function whereAmI(){
  var planet = "Mars";
  console.log(planet);
}

whereAmI(); //logs "Mars"
```

The `destination` variable is locally scoped to the `chooseDestination` function and unavailable in the `launchRocket` function's scope.

```
function chooseDestination(){
  var destination = "The Moon"
}

function launchRocket(){
  console.log(destination);
}

chooseDestination();
launchRocket(); // gives us an error
```

# Organizing Your Code With an Object

To avoid scope issues and help break your code down into more modular components, we can organize our code using an object. 

We start with an empty object that will hold all our our application code.

```
var myApp = {};
```

This creates what's called a **namespace** for our code. All your varaibles and functions will start with the `myApp` namespace, protecting them from conflicts with other code.

We can now add our twitter variable as a property on the app object.

```
myApp.twitter = 'thisishackeryou';
```

We can store entire functions in our app object the same way.

```
myApp.getTweets = function(){
  //code to retrieve tweets
};
```

We can call this function elswehere in the app with:

```
myApp.getTweets();
```

You can add as many variables and functions as you need to keep your code organized into small pieces!

```
var myApp = {};

myApp.twitterHandle = 'thisishackeryou';
myApp.numberOfTweets = 3;
myApp.includeRetweets = false;

myApp.getTweets = function(){
  //retrieves tweets
}

myApp.displayTweets = function(){
  //prints tweets onto the page
}
```

#### Terminology Reminder
Variables are often referred to as **properties** when stored inside an object.
Functions are often refereed to as **methods** when stored inside an object.


## The init Function

Most apps will have a special function called `init` that kicks things off. Anything that needs to happen on page load, and most event handlers go in here. It's also a good place to cache jQuery selectors.

```
var widgetApp = {};

widgetApp.init = function(){
  widgetApp.widgetContainer = $('#widget');
  widgetApp.widgetContainer.addClass('active');
  
  $('a.close').on('click', function(){
    widgetApp.widgetContainer.hide();
  });
}
```

We then call the init function inside a jQuery DOM ready so that it executes on page load.

```
$(function(){
  widgetApp.init();
});
```

### Code Along: Modal 

Let's put this object into play by creating a modal box jQuery plugin.

We will have the following API:

`app.open(html);` to open the modal box and set the content.


`app.close()` to close it


`app.toggle()` to toggle the past two


### Exercise: Groceries

Open `groceries` and you will see some standard markup as well as some boilerplate code.

This example has 5 main things to do which are marked in the source. Make sure that the two lists can be sorted and drag/dropped from one list to another.

